
---
title: Big Data & Democracy
authors: 
  - name: Dave Kinkead
    email: d.kinkead@uq.edu.au
  - name: David M. Douglas
    email: dmdouglas256@tuta.io
status: outline
bibliography: big_data_and_democracy.bib
---

### Old Intro

* Starting point: Democracy made political discussion public, rather than the private discussions of tyranny and oligarchy.
* Big data analytics makes public discussions private again.
* Reach and scale.
* "We are now free to engage in political bullshit.

Political persuasion occurs via various means. Discounting violence and the threat of force, political views may persuade through defensible reasoning, their coherence with previously-held beliefs and knowledge about the world, or by appeals to emotions and biases, or through the charisma and reputation of their proponents. While the ideal of democratic decision making is that citizens' decisions are based on evidence-based reasoning, the reality is that factors such the charisma of those promoting political views or appeals to emotion and biases are as great (if not greater) factors in how the *demos* makes decisions.

Our account is based on representing a democratic political community, or *demos*, as a communication network, where enfranchised members (citizens) can affect political decisions through voting. 

# Communication Between Citizens

The classical model of communication has four components: the communication source, the message communicated, the medium or channel used, and the receiver of the communication [@lilleber_key_2006, p. 17]. The medium may be speech, text printed in a book or pamphlet, sound, images, and video transmitted by mass media. The medium affects how quickly a message is conveyed and to how many people can receive it. A whispered conversation has a narrow and targeted audience, with the source and receiver speaking to each other face-to-face. A television broadcast potentially has an audience of millions. As this example suggests, different media have different levels of accessibility to citizens: anyone capable of hearing and speech can engage in a whispered discussion with another, but a television broadcast requires airtime on a television network. The cost of using the medium to communicate with the desired audience affects how accessible it is to each citizen.

The medium also affects ~~whether messages are *static* or *transient*~~ the degree to which a message is persistent or ephemoral.  Static messages remain accessible after they are communicated, allowing both the original receiver and others to review the message's content at any time. Transient messages are not recorded after they are expressed: they exist only in the memories of the source and receiver. As a result, there is the opportunity to deny or revise the message's content if challenged. Static messages remain the same as long as the recording medium it exists, although the message's context may change. The sources and receivers of transient messages may record them in a static form so that it may inform or persuade those outside of the message's original audience. 

Communication media also differ in the size of the audience they can reach and whether they can be restricted to specific audiences. A whispered conversation is only received by the individuals hearing it. It is interpersonal communication. The speakers in this situation have a clear intended audience for their message: it is not meant for everyone, and anyone out of earshot will be unaware of what was said. In contrast, television broadcasts are available to all who have a television. A interpersonal communication may be called a *narrowcast* message, as it is restricted to a specific intended audience. This is in contrast with the *broadcast* nature of mass media, where messages are received by those disinterested, neutral, or hostile to the message, as well as the intended audience [@lilleker_key_2006, pp. 46--48].

The context of messages is how those who receive and send understand the circumstances in which it occurs, including what kind of message is being communicated. For political messages, the context includes the history of the society, current political and social issues, and the social norms governing behaviour. Understanding the context of a message allows citizens to recognise when political communication is taking place, and that the messages they send and receive should be understood as attempts to persuade others of a given political view. Political communicators recognise the importance of context, and often attempt to convey their messages in unfamiliar contexts so that the audience does not evaluate the message as a political communication. Regulations requiring the source of political messages to clearly identify themselves are another acknowledgement of this importance.^[One response to this claim that is *all* communication is political in that it implicitly reinforces particular norms or a particular ideology. If this is the case, our network account of the *demos* will not be a useful abstraction as political persuasion is not a discreet event that can be isolated from nonpolitical messages. However, the context is still relevant even if all messages contain a political element: overt political messages are still recognisable as such. Implicit political communication in apparently non-political messages are just another context for political messaging to occur.] (As we will argue later, this ability to convey political messages via unexpected contexts is an important concern about using social media as a means of political communication.)

Another aspect of context is the communicator's credibility: the perception of the source's trustworthiness as a source of information and how likely their opinion is based on evidence and defensible reasoning. Credibility is hard to obtain and easy to lose, especially when political messages may be received by an unsympathetic audience. As a result, political communicators endeavour to protect their credibility so that future messages are not undermined. This need to maintain credibility is a constraint on the political messages that a citizen will communicate. Political communicators may accept this constraint and endeavour to use defensible reasoning and verifiable evidence in their messages. However, there may be opportunities to subvert this constraint by either restricting their messages to a friendly and uncritical audience or obscuring them so that messages have different meanings to different audiences (i.e., 'dogwhistling').

Communication between citizens takes time and effort, especially if they are separated by distance. Physical distance may make it impossible for some citizens to convey messages in particular forms: interpersonal communication requires physical proximity unless video conferencing and telecommunications are used, for instance. As this suggests, technology may reduce the difficulties of communicating with other citizens. However, the use of technology has a medium for communicating introduces additional factors that may influence the content, form, and context of messages. These messages are hence technologically *mediated*.

The technology used to communicate and the context in which communication occurs define whether it is *unidirectional* or *bidirectional*. Unidirectional connections mean that the receiver(s) of the message cannot respond with a similar message in the same context. Think of a speaker at a political rally: the crowd may respond with cheers or jeers, but the individuals in the crowd lack the privileges granted by standing on the podium and expressing their views to the audience. The crowd cannot engage in an equal political discussion with the speaker in this context. Unidirectional communication therefore grants a degree of power to the source, as members of her audience (as individuals) do not have the same privilege to present their message to both the source and to the other members of the audience in the same way.

In contrast, bidirectional communication occurs when citizens can respond to the messages in the same context and medium. If a citizen disagrees with a political view, she may respond with a political message of her own in the same medium and context. Interpersonal communication is bidirectional, while the characteristics of different forms of technologically mediated communication determine whether it is unidirectional or bidirectional. The form of technology used to communicate hence affects how political communication takes place and who is privileged over others in how their messages are distributed.


# The Network is the Demos

Our account emphasises the role technology plays in influencing the breadth of political communication that takes place. As technology changes and develops, the characteristics and possible audiences for political messages change as well. The role of technology in changing the possibilities for political communication may be illustrated through historical examples that range of no technological mediation (one-to-one) to completely technologically mediated (one-to-chosen few). Our network model of a democratic community illustrates these differences in the breadth of political communication.

The citizenry of a democracy, the *demos*, communicate with each other to persuade others to accept their political views. The *demos* may be represented as a communication network, where the nodes represent citizens and the connections between nodes represent the means by which citizens communicate with each other. Each citizen has a 'state' representing their voting intention(s). The outcome of a democratic poll is determined by counting the voting intentions of each node and following the decision-making procedure adopted by the *demos*, such as majority voting, preferences, and so on. Political communication, therefore, is the attempt to convince citizens to either change or maintain their voting intention.

Consider a basic example of such a network, containing three equal citizens: Alice, Bob, and Carol. Each of them has the choice between two options in a vote (options 1 and 2). Alice and Bob are proponents for options 1 and 2, respectively. Their voting states are therefore 1 (Alice) and 2 (Bob). Carol is undecided between 1 and 2, and has no prefernce between them: her voting state is 0. As the vote is tied, Alice and Bob both communicate with Carol to convince her to vote for their prefered option. If Alice's message in favour of option 1 convinces Carol, her voting state changes from 0 to 1. Similarly, if Bob is convincing is his message to Carol in favour of option 2, Carol's voting state will change to 0.

This example assumes that Carol is equally receptive to both Alice and Bob's messages. Suppose that is more receptive to Alice's message than to Bob's: perhaps Carol recognises Alice's expertise in matters relating to options 1 and 2. Alice has more credibility as a source for political messages than Bob does. As a result, it is more difficult for Bob to convince Carol to change her voting state from 0 to 2 (and especially from 1 to 2). This willingness to allow messages from particular sources to affect the receiver's voting state is the *weight* given to a message by the receiver. It represents the effects of credibility, defensible reasoning, bias, and other factors that influence the reception of political messages. If the weight of messages from a particular source drops below a given threshold, the messages are ignored by the receiver (i.e., they do not affect her decisions).
=======

In September 2016, Alexander Nix, the CEO of Cambridge Analytica, gave a presentation at the annual Concordia Summit in New York City. His presentation, 'The Power of Big Data and Psychographics', described how his company had assisted the unsuccessful bid of US Sensor Ted Cruz for the Republican Party nomination for the 2016 US Presidential election. Nix explained that his company had developed a model to "predict the personality of every single adult in the United States of America" based on "hundreds and hundreds of thousands" of responses by Americans to a survey. The purpose of this model was to tailor political messages to target individuals with particular personality traits. As Nix explained: "Today communication is becoming ever increasingly targeted. It's being individualised for every single person in this room. [...] [Y]ou'll only receive adverts that not only are on the products and services, or in the case of elections, issues that you care about most, but that have been nuanced in order to reflect the way you see the world." [@noauthor_power_2016]

While Cambridge Analytica would later face questions about how they acquired data via a personality test app they deployed on Facebook, the techniques Nix described demonstrate the possibilities for political messaging that the combination of social media and big data analytics offers. Indeed, the reelection campaign for President Barack Obama in the 2012 US Presidential election was famous for its use of social media and big data analytics [@oneil_weapons_2016, pp. 188-193]. Political organisations now have the tools to identify the issues important to specific individuals, how to present their case in the most effective way for those individuals, and the means to communicate their message directly to individuals without others seeing the same message. Political discussion becomes a private conversation between the speaker and the targeted audience.

Making political discussions private risks undermining the public discussion of political views and identities. A stable democracy requires a shared identity and political culture, a common *demos*, to prevent it breaking down into separate political communities. This in turn necessitates some common communication network for political messages to be transmitted, understood, and evaluated by citizens. Hence, what demarcates one *demos* from another are the means of communication connecting the citizens of those *demoi*, allowing them to debate and persuade each other on the proper conduct of government and on issues of common interest. This is a form of the public sphere identified by Habermas [@benkler_wealth_2006, p. 177]. 

For the ancient Athenians, their public sphere was the *agora* (marketplace); for the Federalists in the American colonies, the newspaper; for us today, it is the internet. Until now, the physical nature of these communication networks has resulted in a trade off between the reach of political messages (the size of the *demos* who receives political messages and may participate in the public sphere) and the ability to target the content of a message on that network toward individual citizens. One-to-one interpersonal conversation in the *agora* was highly targeted but could reach only as far as a voice could be heard. The speakers and audience were well known to each other through personal interaction. As the printing press and later television allowed for greater and greater reach, the content of these messages became more generic as the speakers became more distant from their audience. The wider the audience grew, the less a message could be targeted at a particular audience segment without alienating others. The risk to reputation and credibility that making false claims and conflicting promises to different groups causes increased as more people could receive messages and identify contradictions and errors to the rest of the audience.

The internet and big data analytics have changed the nature of political communication by decoupling message reach from message targeting. This allows individually tailored content to be distributed on a global scale without fear that the content of those messages will be overheard by others who may contest or reject it. Politicians are freed from the constraints imposed on what they say by the public presentation and discussion of arguments and claims. It frees political actors to engage in sophistry, or more bluntly, in spreading political bullshit.^[We are following Harry Frankfurt in using the term 'bullshit' to describe the messages of a speaker who "does not care whether the things he says describes reality correctly. He just picks them out, or makes them up, to suit his purpose." [-@frankfurt_bullshit_2005, p.56.]]

In this chapter, we explore what impact this decoupling has on democracy. We describe how political discussion in democracies has changed over time, as both communication technology and the number of people included in the *demos* have changed. We show that communication technology has previously increased the reach of political messages while also making such messages more public and less targeted towards particular individuals or groups. We then show how social media and big data combine to create echo chambers of political discourse that undermine key assumptions that underpin epistemic justifications of democracy: specifically, the independence and competence assumptions of Condorcet's Jury Theorem, and the shared identity assumption of deliberative accounts. We also offer some suggestions as to how the harms of this decoupling can be reduced.


# Political Communication and Discussion

The classical model of communication has four components: the communication source, the message communicated, the medium or channel used, and the receiver of the communication [@lilleber_key_2006, p. 17]. The medium may be speech, text printed in a book or pamphlet, sound, images, and video transmitted by mass media. The medium affects how many people can receive it. A whispered conversation has a targeted, narrow audience: the source and receiver speak to each other face-to-face. A television broadcast potentially has an audience of millions. As this example suggests, different media have different levels of accessibility to citizens: anyone capable of hearing and speech can engage in a whispered discussion with another, but a television broadcast requires air-time on a television network. The cost of using the medium to communicate with the desired audience affects how accessible it is to a particular individual. 

Political communication is communication between political actors: those able to implement or prevent political action. It becomes necessary when political actors differ in their views and their compliance cannot be enforced through the threat or use of violence. Political discussion aims to convince others of a political goal's merits. If the actors in a political system are limited, these discussions may take place in private and do not need to be distributed outside of the ruling group. Political discussion with the public is unnecessary in a dictatorship, for instance, as the public has no influence in the dictator's actions. Conversely, political discussion with the public is crucial for a democracy as the public may directly affect political decisions through voting in a referendum or indirectly through choosing candidates for office in elections. 

The number of political actors who may participate in a political discussion are that discussion's *reach*. For political systems where only a minority of the population have political power, the reach is limited: dictators need only include their trusted advisors if their decisions can be imposed on others (if they need to be included at all). Similarly for aristocracies or oligarchies, the reach of political discussion only needs to enclose the ruling group whose views affect the likelihood of implementing a political decision. For democracies, the reach of political discussion is ideally all of that democracy's citizens. Practical limitations of the communication medium may limit the extent that citizens can send and receive messages: this limitation sets the discussion's *range*. Ideally, every citizen of a democracy should have the opportunity to participate in public political discussion by being within the discussion's reach and range.


# The Development of Public Political Discussion

As the above suggests, public political discussion is an integral part of a democracy. The reach of public political discussion within democracies has changed as democracies themselves have changed, either through expanding the franchise to greater numbers of people or through new communication technologies. We will illustrate how the reach of public political discussion has developed over time with a quick historical overview of public political discussion. This description is intended to signpost changes in how political discussion has occurred rather than present a detailed historical account. The starting point for our brief tour through communication in democracies is the fledgling democracy of ancient Athens.

## The Agora of Ancient Athens

The *agora* (marketplace) represents the public life of ancient Greece (and specially, than of Athens) [@habermas_structural_1989, p. 3]. Citizenship was restricted to free people whose parents themselves were Athenian citizens, and only men could vote and participate in political life [@aristotle_athenian_1984, L.42]. While many Athenian officials were chosen by lot, military officers, those in charge of the funds for the army and festivals, and the curator of the water supply were elected by the male citizens [@aristotle_athenian_1984, M.43]. The council of five hundred (all chosen by lot) would vote on the issues facing the city and on whether they had confidence in the office holders [@aristotle_athenian_1984, M.43].

This close connection between citizenship and political participation meant that political discussion was an integral part of Athenian life. Political discussion, therefore, was relevant to all the male citizenry of Athens as they all could potentially participate in political decision-making. The potential *reach* of political discussion was all the male citizens of Athens. As Athens was a city-state (although one that would gain and lose power across the Greek peninsula), the geographical range of political discussion did not have to extend far beyond the city (if it had to at all). 

The face-to-face communication of the *agora* also allows speakers to target different audiences. You could shout and be heard by all, or you could whisper and be heard by one. A canny political speaker may tailor his messages to suit different audiences. If the communication remains face-to-face, only by asking the speaker and the listener can others discover what the message was. Such messages are *ephemeral*, as the only evidence of the message's content is the recollection of those involved. These recollections themselves may be changed for political purposes. If a written record is made of a political speech, the message becomes *static* as it has a concrete form that is accessible to others. A static message also has a greater range than an ephemeral one, as it exists in a physical, accessible form that can be read, transported, and copied after the message was first sent. Consider the famous speeches of the Athenian orator Demosthenes as an example: the orations themselves are ephemeral, and his message is transmitted directly to his audience. Written records of these speeches, either made by Demosthenes himself or members of his audience, place the message in a static form that may be communicated to others, distant from the original speech in both time and space. The written accounts of these speeches have a greater range than the original speech itself. Static messages are more difficult to change to suit different audiences for political purposes.

In *Gorgias* (454e), Plato distinguishes between persuasion that gives knowledge to the audience, and persuasion that convinces the audience without providing them knowledge. The first type of persuasion we will call reasoned discussion, as the discussion aims to demonstrate to the audience that if they accept a set of beliefs or facts about the world, they must logically accept the conclusion the speaker is arguing for. Political discussions of this nature revolve around debating the truth or falsity of the statements within the argument, and whether the conclusion (the political act being argued for) necessarily follows from the presented argument. Ideally, reasoned political discussion should allow those who disagree to understand each other's positions, to identify the specific points of disagreement between them, and whether agreement can be reached. Political discussions of this form open up political arguments to critique and examination.

The other form of persuasion does not inform the audience in the same way. In the *Gorgias*, Plato's Socrates presses the claim against the orator Gorgias that a good orator can be more persuasive to those without expert knowledge of a subject than an expert (459b). As a result, a skilled communicator can be persuasive without necessarily being knowledgeable. If the audience is not well educated about the subject under debate, they may be persuaded to accept a conclusion that does not depend on the truth of its statements or the logic of the arguments presented to convince its audience to support a political decision. What is important for this form of persuasion is that the audience accepts the conclusion, not that the argument is justified by the facts or logical structure. We will call this form of political persuasion *sophistry*.^[Our use of the term 'sophistry' does not fully reflect the term's use in ancient Athens, since it did not necessarily carry the same pejorative connotations that it later acquired. Plato's works are frequently hostile to sophistry, although in the *Sophist* (267b-c) he distinguishes what we call 'sophistry' into *sophistry* ("us[ing] short speeches in private conversation to force the person talking with him to contradict himself") and demagoguery (someone who "can maintain his insincerity in long speeches to a crowd"). As our concern is with both types of political discussion, our account of sophistry incorporates Plato's description of the persuasive skills of the demagogue.]

While sophistry is effective, it carries the risk of being identified as a *sophist*. There is a reputational cost to employing sophistry for political ends: it may be effective now, but future attempts to persuade others may be undermined if the baseless claims and faulty logic used in the past are called out by others. If the audience recognises that particular speakers lack the appropriate knowledge, they will be more critical in accepting (or even listening to) their arguments in the future: it risks damaging the speaker's credibility. Using knowledge and reason for political persuasion does not have the same reputational risk as relying on persuasiveness rather than knowledge.^[Of course, we are assuming that people will revise their beliefs in light of new evidence and experience.] Credibility is hard to gain and easy to lose, especially when political messages may be received by an unsympathetic audience. Maintaining credibility is important for ensuring that both a speaker's message is heard, and that a speaker's responses to others' claims are fairly considered by the audience. As a result, the need of political communicators to maintain credibility constrains the political messages a speaker will communicate. However, there may be opportunities to subvert this constraint by either restricting their messages to friendly and uncritical audiences or by obscuring them so that messages have different meanings to different audiences (i.e., 'dog whistling') [goodin_robert_e._dog_2005, p. 471].


## The Federalist Papers

Democracy next appears in North America, where the British colonies there declared independence in 1776 and then successfully rebelled against Great Britain. After the rebellion, the colonies begin to grapple with the problem of how their new nation should be governed. Public political discussion played a crucial role in determining how the colonies would govern themselves and under what terms they should be united. The Federalist Papers by 'Publius' (a pseudonym shared by James Madison, Alexander Hamilton, and John Jay) is an influential example from this period.

The articles that comprised the Federalist Papers appeared in various New York newspapers that presented detailed arguments in support of the proposed Constitution for the future United States. At the time, they were rarely reprinted outside of New York (although the New York newspapers containing may well have traveled far across the American colonies) [@crane_publius_1964, p. 591]. However, they grew in geographical range as time progressed: a French edition was published in 1792 [@horowitz_federalist_2009, p. 503], and it has influenced discussions of democracy across the world ever since. This demonstrates how the accessibility of the printing press made it easier for a larger group of people to widely distribute political messages and increased the possible range that political discussions could have. A wider range of politically active citizens, outside of the state itself and the wealthy, could now distribute messages to geographically dispersed audiences. Where printing presses were in private hands, documents could be produced and distributed without the support of the state or of a ruling elite. This allows a variety of political views to reach a larger number of people without the proponents of such views to face their audience in person, with all the risks that doing so entails.

The Federalist Papers are significant for our discussion for two reasons: the depth and care with which they discuss political issues, and that they were part of a debate with an opposing view that was also in print. The Federalist Papers were a response to newspaper articles that supported rejecting the proposed Constitution (@kramnick_federalist_1987, p. 76).^[Proponents of the draft Constitution and the central federal government it would establish were known as Federalists; their opponents were hence Anti-Federalists [@kramnick_federalist_1987, p. 37].] This demonstrates the possibilities of this form of political discussion. Pamphlets and newspapers may serve as bidirectional communication, as individuals who disagree may respond with political messages of their own in the same medium. Interpersonal communication, such as that in the Athenian *agora*, is bidirectional, but its reach and range is limited as the individuals involved must be a physical proximity to their audience. The bidirectional communication printing made possible allowed for political discussion to take place across larger geographical areas, involve a larger number of people, and occur in front of a greater audience.

Unlike face-to-face communication, the political discussions of the Federalists or the Anti-Federalists could not be easily tailored to suit particular audiences: their arguments were available to all who could read the newspapers that printed them. As the Federalist Papers themselves demonstrate, the arguments were visible to political opponents who could respond in kind. While the use of pseudonyms in publishing static messages allows a degree of tailoring (since it allows an author to present different views under different names, to disguise their common source and without having to be consistent between them), in this case no such deception was intended: the views presented by Madison, Hamilton, and Jay as 'Publius' did not conflict with their public support for the Constitution. Pseudonyms or anonymity in presenting a political message may be used for rhetorical purposes (such as the reference to the Roman Republic that 'Publius' signaled [@kramnick_federalist_1987, p. 72].) or to prevent the message's reception being influenced by any bias (positive or negative) that may result from it being the work of a particular individual or group.


## Mass Media

The messages broadcast via mass media have a reach and range unmatched by messages conveyed via earlier technologies. Radio television allowed governments and heads of state to address their entire population instantly. Franklin D. Roosevelt's 'fireside chats' on radio during his presidency are an iconic example of this new capability (@wu_master_2011, p. 76). These messages are broadcast to the population, making them accessible to all with the technology necessary to receive them. As a result, the message's audience is the entire population, rather than a specific section of it. Messages conveyed via mass media are *broadcast*, where messages are received by those disinterested, neutral, or hostile to the message, as well as the intended audience [@lilleker_key_2006, pp. 46--48]. As a result, broadcast messages need to be acceptable to a wide audience, as questionable claims will be visible (and hence, contestable) to all. The reputational risk of engaging in sophistry is significant, as political opponents or independent commentators may make their own broadcasts in response that highlight another speaker's questionable claims.
 
In contrast, messages conveyed to a limited group of people are *narrowcast* messages, as they are restricted to a specific intended audience. As Lilleker [-@lilleker_key_2006, p. 48] rightly observes, narrowcast messages are insecure in that they may still be received by those outside of the targeted audience, or it may be passed onto and reported by the media.^[Lilleker [-@lilleker_key_2006, p. 48] illustrates this point with the example of the Canadian Liberal Party sending cards to different groups of voters that contained opposing campaign pledges.] If narrowcast messages are made more secure, however, then the reputational risks of using sophistry decreases. If the targeted audience is predisposed to accept claims that others might reject as erroneous, that audience is less likely to be critical of the arguments presented to them.

Mass media also marks the point where public political discussion in democracies became more *unidirectional*: the audience cannot respond with their own messages in the same medium. Unidirectional communication gives the speaker power, as her audience do not have the same privilege to present their own message to both the source and the rest of the audience in the same way. Similarly, the operators of mass media broadcast networks have power over their audience as they decide which speakers appear on their broadcasts and whether they are presented favourably or otherwise. The costs of operating and maintaining the infrastructure necessary to operate broadcast networks are considerably more than operating printing presses.

Broadcast mass media is ephemeral to its audience unless it is recorded. The specialised equipment needed to record radio and television broadcasts were first limited to broadcasters, meaning that the audience had to rely on their memory of the broadcast or on reports of broadcasts written by others. This shows for the first time that an ephemeral message can have a significant reach and range, as previously communicating across both a large geographical area and a large number of people required committing the message to a static form. The later introduction of consumer audio recording and video recording equipment allowed audience to make their own recordings of broadcast messages.

Political communication and mass media will always be associated with the spread of propaganda. Propaganda are public messages that represent given political ideals with the purpose of contributing to achieving those ideals via non-rational means (*supporting propaganda*) or aiming to damage those ideals (*undermining propaganda*) [@stanley_propaganda_2015, pp. 52-53]. While propaganda has always existed in political communication, the combination of reach, range, and the vividness of the sounds and imagery it can convey, made mass media an excellent platform for it.

Stanley argues that propaganda can be both true and sincere from the speaker's perspective (-@stanley_propaganda_2015, p. 41]. If this is the case, then political propaganda goes beyond sophistry, which does not exhibit these characteristics even though propaganda similarly attempts to undermine or bypass rational discussion. However, reasoned political discussion about propaganda ideally should reveal the problematic assumptions and beliefs underpinning it. The source of problematic claims are what Stanley calls *flawed ideologies*: those which justify "unjust distinctions between persons" through "rigid and unchangable belief[s]" that "rationalize undeserved privilege" [-@stanley_propaganda_2015, p. 3]. Such flawed ideologies may cause individuals to sincerely make false claims [@stanley_propaganda_2015, p. 46]. As reasoned examination and public discussion should reveal the flawed ideologies that motivate propaganda, reasonable individuals can modify their views and beliefs in light of new information about the source of their problematic claims. Those who refuse to do so and continue to promote views based on flawed ideologies may then be rightfully regarded as engaging in sophistry, as they are unwilling to use reason based on defensible claims. Continuing to promote claims based flaws ideologies therefore has a reputational cost that damages credibility.

Mass media also made events in other countries, other continents, and even in space visible instantaneously. The speed with which images, films, and recordings of events could be recorded and broadcast across the world gave individuals more vivid impressions of remote events than were possible through written accounts on their own. This accessibility of news of events in the rest of the world, in combination with the growing influence of multinational and global organisations, gave an international audience to political discussions within countries. Those able to use mass media to communicate their political messages thus had a greater potential audience than ever before. The reach and range of political messages became global.


## Computer-Mediated Communication (CMC)

The development of the personal computer created new possibilities for Computer-Mediated Communication (CMC) between individuals, regardless of their geographical proximity. Unlike the passive reception of messages via mass media, CMC describes interactive communication between people via information technology [@ess_computer-mediated_2004, p. 77]. The combination of personal computers and computer networks potentially offered an egalitarian tool for political communication. 

Howard Rheingold's 1994 book *The Virtual Community* describes the emergence of communities around computer networks and the political possibilities it offers. CMC was hailed as promising an 'electronic *agora*', where individuals could again have political discussions as equals, rather than some have the privilege of access to mass media to convey their messages [@rheingold_virtual_1994, p. 14]. As Rheingold asks rhetorically: "Which scenario seems more conducive to democracy, which to totalitarian rule: a world in which a few people control communications technology that can be used to manipulate the beliefs of billions, or a world in which every citizen can broadcast to every other citizen?" [-@rheingold_virtual_1994, p. 14] 

CMC offered the possibility of returning to the bidirectional (many-to-many) political communication of earlier times, in contrast to the unidirectional (one-to-many) communication offered by mass media [@rheingold_virtual_1994, p. 244]. The reach of political discussion via CMC is potentially global. Depending on how CMC is used, the discussions could be public or private. Political discussions conducted via email or other messaging systems would be private, as they are restricted to the communicating individuals. Discussions via public forums allow political messages to be accessible to all who can access it, making such discussions public. Messages on public forums may also be considered broadcast, as they are accessible to all. Messages and discussions intended for a limited audience would be posted to forums that limit access to a specific group.^[The private forums of political websites are examples of this narrowcast messaging.] However, these groups are self-selecting: only those interested in specific issues and who are accepted by the gatekeepers of these private forums will receive these narrowcast messages. The messages in both broadcast public and private narrowcast forums would also be static: even if they are deleted, other users may have saved copies. Private discussions may be either static or ephemeral, depending on the messaging system and whether any of the individuals involved save a copy of the conversation.


# Social Media and Big Data

As our quick overview of the different forms of political communication through the history of democracy suggests, the media available to convey messages affects the size and distribution of the possible audience. In the *agora*, speakers could tailor their messages to specific individuals or audiences, but these messages had a limited reach as they required the speaker and audience to be physically present with each other. The reach of political discussion increased due to the printing press, but the static nature of printed material meant it was difficult to communicate with a specific audience without the message also being visible to others. Face-to-face communication was more secure, as the messages were ephemeral, whereas printed messages and those conveyed via mass media (once recording devices become widespread) were insecure as anyone could access, and potentially challenge, them. The general characteristics of these forms of public political discussion are listed in the following table.

Medium |                           Direction   |    Reach |                   Range |                  Permanence  |       Targeting
-------- |                         ----------- |    ------- |                 ------- |                ------------ |      -----------
Face-to-face |                     Bidirectional |  Physical proximity |     Local |                  Ephemeral |         Narrowcast
Printing |                          Bidirectional |   National/International | National/International | Static |            Broadcast
Radio/Television |                  Unidirectional |  Global |                  Global |                 Ephemeral/Static |  Broadcast
Computer-Medicated Communication |  Bidirectional |   Global |                  Global |                 Static |            Broadcast/Narrowcast

With the exception of unrecorded radio and television, static messages tend to have a greater reach and range than ephemeral ones. There is a trade-off between reaching a large and geographically disperse audience and limiting that message to a selected group. It becomes more difficult to *target* a specific group within the audience with a broadcast political message in a static form, as static messages are more difficult to restrict to a limited group when they have to be sent across a communication network (such as printers, messengers, and postal services). Static messages have a greater accessibility to others than ephemeral ones. As a result, the greater possibility of having a critical audience and the reputational risks of engaging in sophistry encourage speakers to be reasonable in their arguments and provide justifications for their claims.

Political speakers who wish to make unreasonable claims (such as those which reject democratic norms of political equality, for example) must therefore conceal them from critical audiences. Targeted messaging offers a possibility for achieving this through either concealing unreasonable claims within a seemingly reasonable argument by using terms that are interpreted differently by different groups (i.e., 'dog whistling'); and by communicating directly with a specific, sympathetic audience who are more likely to accept the speaker's questionable claims. These methods create the possibility of widely-distributed narrowcast messaging. Such messages are still static, however, and so may leak outside the targeted group and become visible to the rest of the audience. 

The combination of big data analytics and social media communication creates the new possibility of ephemeral narrowcast messaging. These messages are narrowcast because they are received only by selected citizens, who have been selected due to their susceptibility to these messages (as indicated through profiling via big data analytics). Unlike private Internet forums and groups, the targeted audience are not self-selecting in that they deliberately sought out and communicate with others who share their political views: the selection into groups is performing through data analytics, and the audience may be unaware that they are being targeted for their estimated responsiveness to the speaker's messages. Crucially, it also allows these messages to be ephemeral, as conveying the message via social media means it is hidden from others unless a recipient chooses to share it. The previous connection between broadcast messages and the inability to target a specific audience can be broken. The previously public nature of broadcast messages can now be made private.

# Epistemic Justifications for Democracy
 
