## 5. Big data and social media decouple the traditional communications trade off

The development of the personal computer created new possibilities for Computer-Mediated Communication (CMC) between individuals, regardless of their geographical proximity.  Unlike the passive reception of messages via mass media, CMC describes interactive communication between people via information technology [@ess_computer-mediated_2004, p. 77].  The combination of personal computers and computer networks potentially offered an egalitarian tool for political communication. 

CMC offered the possibility of returning to the bidirectional (many-to-many) political communication of earlier times, in contrast to the unidirectional (one-to-many) communication offered by mass media [@rheingold_virtual_1994, p. 244].  The reach of political messages via CMC is potentially global.  Depending on how CMC is used, the discussions could be public or private.  Political discussions conducted via email or other messaging systems would be private, as they are restricted to the communicating individuals.  Discussions via public forums allow political messages to be accessible to all who can access it, making such discussions public.  Messages on public forums may also be considered broadcast, as they are accessible to all.  Messages intended for a limited audience would be posted to forums that limit access to a specific group.^[The private forums of political websites are examples of this narrowcast messaging.]  However, these groups are self-selecting: only those interested in specific issues and who are accepted by the gatekeepers of these private forums will receive these narrowcast messages.  The messages in both broadcast public and private narrowcast forums would also be static: even if they are deleted, other users may have saved copies.  Private discussions may be either static or ephemeral, depending on the messaging system and whether any of the individuals involved save a copy of the conversation.


## Summary of forms of communications media

As our quick overview of the different forms of political communication through the history of democracy suggests, the media available to convey messages affects the size and distribution of the possible audience.  In the *agora*, speakers could tailor messages to specific individuals or audiences, but these messages had a limited reach as they required the speaker and audience to be physically present with each other.  The reach of political discussion increased due to the printing press, but the static nature of printed material meant it was difficult to communicate with a specific audience without the message also being visible to others.  Face-to-face communication was more secure, as the messages were ephemeral, whereas printed messages and those conveyed via mass media (once recording devices become widespread) were insecure as anyone could access, and potentially challenge, them.  The general characteristics of these forms of public political discussion are listed in the following table.

Medium                             Direction        Reach                  Permanence         Targeting
--------                           -----------      -------                ------------       -----------
Face-to-face                       Bidirectional    Physical proximity     Ephemeral          Narrowcast
Printing                           Bidirectional    National/International Static             Broadcast
Broadcast Mass Media               Unidirectional   Global                 Static             Broadcast
Computer-Medicated Communication   Bidirectional    Global                 Static             Broadcast/Narrowcast

With the exception of unrecorded radio and television, static messages tend to have a greater reach than ephemeral ones.  There is a trade-off between reaching a large and geographically disperse audience and limiting that message to a selected group.  It becomes more difficult to *target* a specific group within the audience with a broadcast political message in a static form, as static messages are more difficult to restrict to a limited group when they have to be sent across a communication network (such as printers, messengers, and postal services).  Static messages are less secure than ephemeral ones.  As a result, the greater possibility of having a critical audience and the reputational risks of engaging in sophistry encourage speakers to be reasonable in their arguments and to justify their claims.

Political speakers wishing to make unreasonable claims (such as those which reject democratic norms of political equality, for example) must therefore conceal them from critical audiences.  Targeted messaging offers a possibility for achieving this through either concealing unreasonable claims within a seemingly reasonable argument by using terms that are interpreted differently by different groups (i.e., 'dog whistling'); and by communicating directly with a specific, sympathetic audience who are more likely to accept the speaker's claims.  These methods create the possibility of widely-distributed narrowcast messaging.  Such messages are still static, however, and so may leak outside the targeted group and become visible to the rest of the audience. 


## Social Media and Big Data

The combination of big data analytics and social media communication creates the new possibility of ephemeral narrowcast messaging.  These messages are narrowcast because they are received only by selected citizens, who have been selected due to their susceptibility to these messages (as indicated through profiling via big data analytics).  Unlike private Internet forums and groups, the targeted audience are not self-selecting in that they deliberately seek out and communicate with others who share their political views: the selection into groups is performing through data analytics, and the audience may be unaware that they are being targeted for their estimated responsiveness to the speaker's messages.  Crucially, it also allows these messages to be ephemeral, as conveying the message via social media means it is hidden from others unless a recipient chooses to share it.  The previous connection between broadcast messages and the inability to securely target a specific audience can be broken.  The previously public nature of broadcast messages can now be made private.

The enclosure of broadcast messages into narrowcast messages targeted at specific groups reduces the public visibility of such messages.  This is particularly concerning if the targeted groups share what Jason Stanley calls *flawed ideologies*: those justifying "unjust distinctions between persons" through "rigid and unchangable belief[s]" that "rationalize undeserved privilege" [-@stanley_propaganda_2015, p. 3]. Such flawed ideologies may cause individuals to sincerely make false claims [@stanley_propaganda_2015, p. 46]. As reasoned examination and public discussion should reveal flawed ideologies, reasonable individuals can modify their views and beliefs in light of new information about the source of their problematic claims.  Those who refuse to do so and continue to promote views based on flawed ideologies may then be rightfully regarded as engaging in sophistry, as they are unwilling to engage in reasoned political discussion.  If the messages are visible only to such groups and the messages they receive support or reinforce their ideology, their false claims will not be seen by those able to challenge them.
